doc/circuit_data_references.md, before:

## 2021

- [arXiv:2103.02202](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.02202) → [Ancillary files of "Stim: a fast stabilizer circuit simulator"](https://arxiv.org/src/2103.02202v3/anc)
- [arXiv:2108.10457](https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.10457) → [Ancillary files of "A Fault-Tolerant Honeycomb Memory"](https://arxiv.org/src/2108.10457v2/anc)

## 2022

- [arXiv:2202.11845](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.11845) → [Data for "Benchmarking the Planar Honeycomb Code"](https://zenodo.org/records/7072889)
- [arXiv:2204.13834](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.13834) → [Data for "Stability Experiments: The Overlooked Dual of Memory Experiments"](https://zenodo.org/records/6859486)
- [arXiv:2206.12780](https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.12780) → [Data for "A Pair Measurement Surface Code on Pentagons"](https://zenodo.org/records/6626417)
- [arXiv:2207.06431](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.06431) → [Data for "Suppressing quantum errors by scaling a surface code logical qubit"](https://zenodo.org/records/6804040)
- [arXiv:2209.08552](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.08552) → [Parallel window decoding enables scalable fault tolerant quantum computation](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8422904)

## 2023

- [arXiv:2302.02192](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.02192) → [Data for "Relaxing Hardware Requirements for Surface Code Circuits using Time-dynamics"](https://zenodo.org/records/7587578)
- [arXiv:2302.07395](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.07395) → [Data for "Inplace Access to the Surface Code Y Basis"](https://zenodo.org/records/7487893)
- [arXiv:2302.12292](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.12292) → [Data for "Cleaner magic states with hook injection"](https://zenodo.org/records/7575030)
- [arXiv:2305.12046](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12046) → [Data for "Less Bacon More Threshold"](https://zenodo.org/records/7901729)
- [arXiv:2307.10147](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.10147) → [Stim circuits for "Tangling schedules eases hardware connectivity requirements for quantum error correction" manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/8391674)
- [arXiv:2308.03750](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03750) → [Ancillary data for the paper "Constructions and performance of hyperbolic and semi-hyperbolic Floquet codes" ](https://github.com/oscarhiggott/hyperbolic-floquet-data)
- [arXiv:2309.05558](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05558) → [Data supporting "A real-time, scalable, fast and resource-efficient decoder for a quantum computer"](https://zenodo.org/records/11621878)
- [arXiv:2312.04522](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04522) → [Data for "Yoked Surface Codes"](https://zenodo.org/records/10277397)
- [arXiv:2312.08813](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.08813) → [Data for "New circuits and an open source decoder for the colorcode"](https://zenodo.org/records/10375289)
- [arXiv:2312.11605](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11605) → [Stim circuits and collected data for "Error-corrected Hadamard gate simulated at the circuit level" manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/10391116)
- [arXiv:2312.14060](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14060) → [Data for "Fault-tolerant quantum architectures based on erasure qubits"](https://zenodo.org/records/13730128)

## 2024

- [arXiv:2405.15854](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15854) → [Stim circuits for 'Accommodating Fabrication Defects on Floquet Codes with Minimal Hardware Requirements' manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/11241876)
- [arXiv:2406.02700](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02700) → [Data for "Optimization of decoder priors for accurate quantum error correction"](https://zenodo.org/records/11403595)
- [arXiv:2407.13826](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13826) → [Stim circuits for 'Designing fault-tolerant circuits using detector error models'](https://github.com/peter-janderks/short_measurement_schedules_simulations/tree/main/stim_circuits)
- [arXiv:2408.00758](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00758) → [Stim circuits for ``To reset, or not to reset -- that is the question" manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/13152440)
- [arXiv:2408.11894](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11894) → [Stim circuits for 'Automated Synthesis of Fault-Tolerant State Preparation Circuits for Quantum Error Correction Codes'](https://github.com/cda-tum/mqt-qecc/tree/main/src/mqt/qecc/ft_stateprep/eval/circuits)
- [arXiv:2408.13687](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.13687) → [Data for "Quantum error correction below the surface code threshold"](https://zenodo.org/records/13273331)
- [arXiv:2409.17595](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17595) → [Data for "Magic state cultivation: growing T states as cheap as CNOT gates"](https://zenodo.org/records/13777072)
- [arXiv:2412.01391](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01391) → [GitHub repo for "Transversal Logical Clifford gates on rotated surface codes with reconfigurable neutral atom arrays"](https://github.com/Zihan-Chen-PhMA/Dynamical-S-gate-decoding/) (circuits are in the circuit_garage/ directory)
- [arXiv:2412.14256](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14256) → [Data for "Scaling and logic in the color code on a superconducting quantum processor"](https://zenodo.org/records/14238944)
- [arXiv:2412.14360](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14360) → [Data for "Demonstrating dynamic surface codes"](https://zenodo.org/records/14238907)

## 2025

- [arXiv:2503.04968](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04968) → [GitHub repo for "Optimized Noise-Resilient Surface Code Teleportation Interfaces"](https://github.com/QEC-pages/Modular-Surface-code-simulations/) (circuits are in the out/ directory)
- [arXiv:2503.18657](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18657) → [GitHub repo for "Efficient Magic State Cultivation on RP^2"](https://github.com/Zihan-Chen-PhMA/Cultiv_T_RP2/) (circuits are in the circuit_garage/ directory)
- [arXiv:2507.08069](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08069) → [Stim circuits and simulation results for "A dynamic circuit for the honeycomb Floquet code"](https://zenodo.org/records/15854678)
- [arXiv:2507.19430](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19430) → [Stim circuits and parity check matrices for "Directional Codes: a new family of quantum LDPC codes on hexagonal- and square-grid connectivity hardware" manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/16422162)

Commit message:

Add a stim circuit data reference related to the [[16,4,4]] tesseract code (#995)
Added a link to my implementation/reproduction of the [[[16,4,4]]
tesseract subsystem color code](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.04628).

doc/circuit_data_references.md, after:

## 2021

- [arXiv:2103.02202](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.02202) → [Ancillary files of "Stim: a fast stabilizer circuit simulator"](https://arxiv.org/src/2103.02202v3/anc)
- [arXiv:2108.10457](https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.10457) → [Ancillary files of "A Fault-Tolerant Honeycomb Memory"](https://arxiv.org/src/2108.10457v2/anc)

## 2022

- [arXiv:2202.11845](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.11845) → [Data for "Benchmarking the Planar Honeycomb Code"](https://zenodo.org/records/7072889)
- [arXiv:2204.13834](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.13834) → [Data for "Stability Experiments: The Overlooked Dual of Memory Experiments"](https://zenodo.org/records/6859486)
- [arXiv:2206.12780](https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.12780) → [Data for "A Pair Measurement Surface Code on Pentagons"](https://zenodo.org/records/6626417)
- [arXiv:2207.06431](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.06431) → [Data for "Suppressing quantum errors by scaling a surface code logical qubit"](https://zenodo.org/records/6804040)
- [arXiv:2209.08552](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.08552) → [Parallel window decoding enables scalable fault tolerant quantum computation](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8422904)

## 2023

- [arXiv:2302.02192](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.02192) → [Data for "Relaxing Hardware Requirements for Surface Code Circuits using Time-dynamics"](https://zenodo.org/records/7587578)
- [arXiv:2302.07395](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.07395) → [Data for "Inplace Access to the Surface Code Y Basis"](https://zenodo.org/records/7487893)
- [arXiv:2302.12292](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.12292) → [Data for "Cleaner magic states with hook injection"](https://zenodo.org/records/7575030)
- [arXiv:2305.12046](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12046) → [Data for "Less Bacon More Threshold"](https://zenodo.org/records/7901729)
- [arXiv:2307.10147](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.10147) → [Stim circuits for "Tangling schedules eases hardware connectivity requirements for quantum error correction" manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/8391674)
- [arXiv:2308.03750](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03750) → [Ancillary data for the paper "Constructions and performance of hyperbolic and semi-hyperbolic Floquet codes" ](https://github.com/oscarhiggott/hyperbolic-floquet-data)
- [arXiv:2309.05558](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05558) → [Data supporting "A real-time, scalable, fast and resource-efficient decoder for a quantum computer"](https://zenodo.org/records/11621878)
- [arXiv:2312.04522](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04522) → [Data for "Yoked Surface Codes"](https://zenodo.org/records/10277397)
- [arXiv:2312.08813](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.08813) → [Data for "New circuits and an open source decoder for the colorcode"](https://zenodo.org/records/10375289)
- [arXiv:2312.11605](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11605) → [Stim circuits and collected data for "Error-corrected Hadamard gate simulated at the circuit level" manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/10391116)
- [arXiv:2312.14060](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14060) → [Data for "Fault-tolerant quantum architectures based on erasure qubits"](https://zenodo.org/records/13730128)

## 2024

- [arXiv:2405.15854](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15854) → [Stim circuits for 'Accommodating Fabrication Defects on Floquet Codes with Minimal Hardware Requirements' manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/11241876)
- [arXiv:2406.02700](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02700) → [Data for "Optimization of decoder priors for accurate quantum error correction"](https://zenodo.org/records/11403595)
- [arXiv:2407.13826](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13826) → [Stim circuits for 'Designing fault-tolerant circuits using detector error models'](https://github.com/peter-janderks/short_measurement_schedules_simulations/tree/main/stim_circuits)
- [arXiv:2408.00758](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00758) → [Stim circuits for ``To reset, or not to reset -- that is the question" manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/13152440)
- [arXiv:2408.11894](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11894) → [Stim circuits for 'Automated Synthesis of Fault-Tolerant State Preparation Circuits for Quantum Error Correction Codes'](https://github.com/cda-tum/mqt-qecc/tree/main/src/mqt/qecc/ft_stateprep/eval/circuits)
- [arXiv:2408.13687](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.13687) → [Data for "Quantum error correction below the surface code threshold"](https://zenodo.org/records/13273331)
- [arXiv:2409.04628](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.04628) → [Stim implementation of the [[16,4,4]] Tesseract Code](https://github.com/DeDuckProject/tesseract-code-stim) (circuits are in the stim_circuits/ directory)
- [arXiv:2409.17595](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17595) → [Data for "Magic state cultivation: growing T states as cheap as CNOT gates"](https://zenodo.org/records/13777072)
- [arXiv:2412.01391](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01391) → [GitHub repo for "Transversal Logical Clifford gates on rotated surface codes with reconfigurable neutral atom arrays"](https://github.com/Zihan-Chen-PhMA/Dynamical-S-gate-decoding/) (circuits are in the circuit_garage/ directory)
- [arXiv:2412.14256](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14256) → [Data for "Scaling and logic in the color code on a superconducting quantum processor"](https://zenodo.org/records/14238944)
- [arXiv:2412.14360](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14360) → [Data for "Demonstrating dynamic surface codes"](https://zenodo.org/records/14238907)

## 2025

- [arXiv:2503.04968](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04968) → [GitHub repo for "Optimized Noise-Resilient Surface Code Teleportation Interfaces"](https://github.com/QEC-pages/Modular-Surface-code-simulations/) (circuits are in the out/ directory)
- [arXiv:2503.18657](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18657) → [GitHub repo for "Efficient Magic State Cultivation on RP^2"](https://github.com/Zihan-Chen-PhMA/Cultiv_T_RP2/) (circuits are in the circuit_garage/ directory)
- [arXiv:2507.08069](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08069) → [Stim circuits and simulation results for "A dynamic circuit for the honeycomb Floquet code"](https://zenodo.org/records/15854678)
- [arXiv:2507.19430](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19430) → [Stim circuits and parity check matrices for "Directional Codes: a new family of quantum LDPC codes on hexagonal- and square-grid connectivity hardware" manuscript](https://zenodo.org/records/16422162)
